Add Networking Telemetry docs (#31811)
dotnet/docs: docs/fundamentals/networking/networking-telemetry.md

---
title: Networking Telemetry in .NET
description: Learn how to consume and correlate .NET telemetry events.
author: MihaZupan
ms.author: mizupan
ms.date: 10/18/2022
---

# Networking Telemetry in .NET

> If you are looking for information on tracking HTTP operations across different services, see the [distributed tracing documentation].

Author: Sure thing, I just wanted to direct folks away from advanced topics if they don't need them. I'll move it down.

Networking information is split across several groups:

- `System.Net.Http` (`HttpClient` and `SocketsHttpHandler`)
- `System.Net.NameResolution` (`Dns`)
- `System.Net.Security` (`SslStream`)
- `System.Net.Sockets`
- `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Hosting`
- `Microsoft-AspNetCore-Server-Kestrel`

The telemetry has some performance overhead when enabled, so make sure to subscribe only to groups you are actually interested in.

## Event Counters (metrics)

[EventCounters] are .NET APIs used for lightweight, cross-platform, and near real-time performance metric collection.

Networking components are instrumented to publish basic diagnostics information using EventCounters.
They include information like

- `System.Net.Http` > `requests-started`
- `System.Net.Http` > `requests-failed`
- `System.Net.Http` > `http11-connections-current-total`
- `System.Net.Security` > `all-tls-sessions-open`
- `System.Net.Sockets` > `outgoing-connections-established`
- `System.Net.NameResolution` > `dns-lookups-duration`

> **For the full list, check out [well-known counters].**

Author: Any other highlighting feature we could use? This is one of the more useful links on this page.

> **For the whole list, check out [well-known counters].**

Reviewer: I think word "full" is used more commonly in this context

```suggestion
**For the full list, check out [well-known counters].**
```

### Monitor metrics from outside the process

#### dotnet-counters

[`dotnet-counters`][dotnet-counter docs] is a cross-platform performance monitoring tool for ad-hoc health monitoring and first-level performance investigation.

```console
dotnet tool install --global dotnet-counters
```

```console
dotnet-counters monitor --counters System.Net.Http,System.Net.Security --process-id 1234
```

The command will keep refreshing the console with the latest numbers

```txt
[System.Net.Http]
    Current Http 1.1 Connections                       3
    Current Http 2.0 Connections                       1
    Current Http 3.0 Connections                       0
    Current Requests                                   4
    HTTP 1.1 Requests Queue Duration (ms)              0
    HTTP 2.0 Requests Queue Duration (ms)              0
    HTTP 3.0 Requests Queue Duration (ms)              0
    Requests Failed                                    0
    Requests Failed Rate (Count / 1 sec)               0
    Requests Started                                 470
    Requests Started Rate (Count / 1 sec)             18
```

See [dotnet-counter docs] for all the available commands and parameters.

> #### Application Insights

Author: This one is the name of a product, should it still be made lowercase?

> #### Application Insights

Reviewer 2: No it shouldn't, sorry.

Application Insights does not collect event counters by default.
See [AppInsights EventCounters docs] on customizing the set of counters you are interested in.

For example:

```c#
services.ConfigureTelemetryModule<EventCounterCollectionModule>((module, options) =>
{
    module.Counters.Add(new EventCounterCollectionRequest("System.Net.Http", "current-requests"));
    module.Counters.Add(new EventCounterCollectionRequest("System.Net.Http", "requests-failed"));
    module.Counters.Add(new EventCounterCollectionRequest("System.Net.Http", "http11-connections-current-total"));
    module.Counters.Add(new EventCounterCollectionRequest("System.Net.Security", "all-tls-sessions-open"));
});
```

> See [this sample](https://gist.github.com/MihaZupan/02ec402fa34880df129351b92e18e86c) for subscribing to many runtime and ASP.NET event counters.

Reviewer 2: Does it need to be a gist? Can we just add it as a code file to this repo instead, and reference it as a code snippet?

### Consume metrics in-process

The [`Yarp.Telemetry.Consumption`] library makes it easy to consume metrics from within the process.
While the package is currently maintained as part of the [YARP] project, it can be used in any .NET application.

To use it, implement the `IMetricsConsumer<TMetrics>` interface:

```c#
public sealed class MyMetricsConsumer : IMetricsConsumer<SocketsMetrics>
{
    public void OnMetrics(SocketsMetrics previous, SocketsMetrics current)
    {
        var elapsedTime = (current.Timestamp - previous.Timestamp).TotalMilliseconds;
        Console.WriteLine($"Received {current.BytesReceived - previous.BytesReceived} bytes in the last {elapsedTime:N2} ms");
    }
}
```

> And register the implementations with your DI container:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then register the implementations with your DI container:
```

```c#
services.AddSingleton<IMetricsConsumer<SocketsMetrics>, MyMetricsConsumer>();
services.AddTelemetryListeners();
```

> The library provides the following strongly-typed metrics types: [`HttpMetrics`], [`NameResolutionMetrics`], [`NetSecurityMetrics`], [`SocketsMetrics`] and [`KestrelMetrics`].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The library provides the following strongly typed metrics types:

- [`HttpMetrics`]
- [`NameResolutionMetrics`]
- [`NetSecurityMetrics`]
- [`SocketsMetrics`]
- [`KestrelMetrics`]
```

## Events

> Events give you access to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Events give you access to:
```

> - accurate timestamps throughout the lifetime of an operation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Accurate timestamps throughout the lifetime of an operation. For example, how long it took to connect to the server and how long it took to receive response headers.
```

>   - E.g. how long it took to connect to the server and how long it took to receive response headers

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> - debug/trace information that may not be obtainable by other means

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Debug/trace information that may not be obtainable by other means. For example, what kind of decisions the connection pool made and why.
```

>   - E.g. what kind of decisions did the connection pool make and why

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

The instrumentation is based on [EventSource], allowing you to collect this information from both inside and outside the process.

### Consume events in-process

Prefer in-process collection when possible for easier event correlation and analysis.

#### EventListener

[EventListener] is an API that allows you to listen to [EventSource] events from within the same process that produced them.

```c#
using System.Diagnostics.Tracing;

using var listener = new MyListener();

using var client = new HttpClient();
await client.GetStringAsync("https://httpbin.org/get");

public sealed class MyListener : EventListener
{
    protected override void OnEventSourceCreated(EventSource eventSource)
    {
        if (eventSource.Name == "System.Net.Http")
        {
            EnableEvents(eventSource, EventLevel.Informational);
        }
    }

    protected override void OnEventWritten(EventWrittenEventArgs eventData)
    {
        Console.WriteLine($"{DateTime.UtcNow:ss:fff} {eventData.EventName}: " +
            string.Join(' ', eventData.PayloadNames!.Zip(eventData.Payload!).Select(pair => $"{pair.First}={pair.Second}")));
    }
}
```

> Will print something like the following:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The preceding code prints output similar to the following:
```

> ```txt

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```output
```

00:598 RequestStart: scheme=https host=httpbin.org port=443 pathAndQuery=/get versionMajor=1 versionMinor=1 versionPolicy=0
01:470 ConnectionEstablished: versionMajor=1 versionMinor=1
01:474 RequestLeftQueue: timeOnQueueMilliseconds=470,6214 versionMajor=1 versionMinor=1
01:476 RequestHeadersStart:
01:477 RequestHeadersStop:
01:592 ResponseHeadersStart:
01:593 ResponseHeadersStop:
01:633 ResponseContentStart:
01:635 ResponseContentStop:
01:635 RequestStop:
01:637 ConnectionClosed: versionMajor=1 versionMinor=1
```

#### Yarp.Telemetry.Consumption

> While the `EventListener` approach outlined above is useful for quick experimentation and debugging, the APIs are not strongly-typed and force you into depending on implementation details of the instrumented library.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
While the `EventListener` approach outlined above is useful for quick experimentation and debugging, the APIs aren't strongly typed and force you to depend on implementation details of the instrumented library.
```

> To address this, we created a library that makes it easy to consume networking events in-process: [`Yarp.Telemetry.Consumption`].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To address this, .NET created a library that makes it easy to consume networking events in-process: [`Yarp.Telemetry.Consumption`].
```

While the package is currently maintained as part of the [YARP] project, it can be used in any .NET application.

> To use it, implement the interfaces and methods (events) you are interested in:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To use it, implement the interfaces and methods (events) that you're interested in:
```

```c#
public sealed class MyTelemetryConsumer : IHttpTelemetryConsumer, INetSecurityTelemetryConsumer
{
    public void OnRequestStart(DateTime timestamp, string scheme, string host, int port, string pathAndQuery, int versionMajor, int versionMinor, HttpVersionPolicy versionPolicy)
    {
        Console.WriteLine($"Request to {host} started at {timestamp}");
    }

    public void OnHandshakeStart(DateTime timestamp, bool isServer, string targetHost)
    {
        Console.WriteLine($"Starting TLS handshake with {targetHost}");
    }
}
```

And register the implementations with your DI container:

```c#
services.AddTelemetryConsumer<MyTelemetryConsumer>();
```

> The library provides the following strongly-typed interfaces: [`IHttpTelemetryConsumer`], [`INameResolutionTelemetryConsumer`], [`INetSecurityTelemetryConsumer`], [`ISocketsTelemetryConsumer`] and [`IKestrelTelemetryConsumer`].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The library provides the following strongly typed interfaces:

- [`IHttpTelemetryConsumer`]
- [`INameResolutionTelemetryConsumer`]
- [`INetSecurityTelemetryConsumer`]
- [`ISocketsTelemetryConsumer`]
- [`IKestrelTelemetryConsumer`]
```

> Note that these callbacks are called as part of the instrumented operation, so the general logging guidance applies. You should avoid blocking or performing any expensive calculations as part of the callback. Offload any post-processing work to different threads to avoid adding latency to the underlying operation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
These callbacks are called as part of the instrumented operation, so the general logging guidance applies. You should avoid blocking or performing any expensive calculations as part of the callback. Offload any post-processing work to different threads to avoid adding latency to the underlying operation.
```

### Consume events from outside the process

#### dotnet-trace

[`dotnet-trace`][dotnet-trace docs] is a cross-platform tool that enables the collection of .NET Core traces of a running process without a native profiler.

```console
dotnet tool install --global dotnet-trace
```

```console
dotnet-trace collect --providers System.Net.Http,System.Net.Security,System.Threading.Tasks.TplEventSource:0x80:4 --process-id 1234
```

> See [dotnet-trace docs] for all the available commands and parameters.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For all the available commands and parameters, see the [dotnet-trace docs].
```

You can analyze the captured `.nettrace` file in Visual Studio or [PerfView].

> See [dotnet-trace analysis docs].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information, see the [dotnet-trace analysis docs].
```

#### PerfView

> [PerfView] is a free, advanced performance-analysis tool. It runs on Windows, but can also analyze traces captured on Linux.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[PerfView] is a free, advanced performance analysis tool. It runs on Windows but can also analyze traces captured on Linux.
```

To configure the list of events to capture, specify them under `Advanced Options / Additional Providers`:

```txt
*System.Net.Sockets,*System.Net.NameResolution,*System.Net.Http,*System.Net.Security
```

#### TraceEvent

> [`TraceEvent`] is a library that allows you to consume events from different processes in real-time. `dotnet-trace` and `PerfView` both rely on it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[`TraceEvent`] is a library that allows you to consume events from different processes in real time. `dotnet-trace` and `PerfView` both rely on it.
```

> If you wish to process events programmatically and in real-time, see [`TraceEvent`] docs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you want to process events programmatically and in real time, see the [`TraceEvent`] docs.
```

> ## Event Correlation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Event correlation
```

Now that you know how to observe these events, you often need to correlate them together, generally to the originating HTTP request.

Prefer in-process collection when possible for easier event correlation and analysis.

### In-process correlation

> As networking makes use async I/O, we can't assume that the thread which completed a given request is also the thread that started it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As networking uses asynchronous I/O, you can't assume that the thread that completed a given request is also the thread that started it.
```

> This means we can't use `[ThreadLocal]` statics to correlate events, but we can use an [`AsyncLocal`].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means you can't use `[ThreadLocal]` statics to correlate events, but you can use an [`AsyncLocal`].
```

> Get familiar with [`AsyncLocal`] as this type is key to correlating work across different threads.

Author: It does link to that

> Get familiar with [`AsyncLocal`] as this type is key to correlating work across different threads.

Reviewer 3: Not in the rendered markdown:
![grafik](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5755834/196412594-5c09bab4-894f-4d5c-a161-bccb4307881d.png)

> Get familiar with [`AsyncLocal`] as this type is key to correlating work across different threads.

Author: Well the markdown links to `xref:System.Threading.AsyncLocal%601`, but that's turned into the property link by the publishing infra.
See preview: https://review.learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/fundamentals/networking/networking-telemetry?branch=pr-en-us-31811#in-process-correlation

> Get familiar with [`AsyncLocal`] as this type is key to correlating work across different threads.

Reviewer 3: Got it, thanks!
I can't see the preview (no rights), so just looked at the *.md file directly. The other links were shown correctly, thus I thought here's something missing.

> Get familiar with [`AsyncLocal`] as this type is key to correlating work across different threads.

Author: Yeah, I'm not a fan of the local editing experience with these either.
Other links to APIs (e.g. `EventSource` that links to `xref:System.Diagnostics.Tracing.EventSource`) have the same sort of issue.

`AsyncLocal` allows you to access the same state deeper into the async flow of an operation. `AsyncLocal` values only flow down (deeper into the async call stack), and don't propagate changes up to the caller.

Consider the following example:

```c#
AsyncLocal<int> asyncLocal = new();
asyncLocal.Value = 1;

await WorkAsync();
Console.WriteLine($"Value after WorkAsync: {asyncLocal.Value}");

async Task WorkAsync()
{
    Console.WriteLine($"Value in WorkAsync: {asyncLocal.Value}");
    asyncLocal.Value = 2;
    Console.WriteLine($"Value in WorkAsync: {asyncLocal.Value}");
}
```

> which prints

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This code produces the following output:
```

> ```txt

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```output
```

Value in WorkAsync: 1
Value in WorkAsync: 2
Value after WorkAsync: 1
```

The value `1` flowed down from the caller into `WorkAsync`, but the modification in `WorkAsync` (`2`) did not flow back up to the caller.

As telemetry events (and their corresponding callbacks) occur as part of the underlying operation, they happen within the same async scope as the caller that initiated the request.
This means that you can observe `asyncLocal.Value` from within the callback, but if you set the value in the callback, nothing will be able to observe it further up the stack.

> The general pattern is therefore to:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following steps show the general pattern.
```

> 1. Create a mutable class that can be updated from inside event callbacks

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create a mutable class that can be updated from inside event callbacks.
```

    ```c#
    public sealed class RequestInfo
    {
        public DateTime StartTime, HeadersSent;
    }
    ```

> 1. Set the `AsyncLocal.Value` *before* the main operation so that the state will flow into it the operation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Set the `AsyncLocal.Value` *before* the main operation so that the state will flow into the operation.
```

    ```c#
    private static readonly AsyncLocal<RequestInfo> _requestInfo = new();
    
    public async Task SendRequestAsync(string url)
    {
        var info = new RequestInfo();
        _requestInfo.Value = info;
        
        info.StartTime = DateTime.UtcNow;
        await _client.GetStringAsync(url);
    ```

1. Inside the event callbacks, check if the shared state is available and update it. `AsyncLocal.Value` will be `null` if the request was sent by a component that didn't set the `AsyncLocal.Value` in the first place.

    ```c#
    public void OnRequestHeadersStop(DateTime timestamp)
    {
        if (_requestInfo.Value is { } info) info.HeadersSent = timestamp;
    }
    ```

> 1. Process the collected information after finishing the operation

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Process the collected information after finishing the operation.
```

    ```c#
    await _client.GetStringAsync(url);
    
    Log($"Time until headers were sent {url} was {info.HeadersSent - info.StartTime}");
    ```

> See the samples section below for more ways to do this.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more ways to do this, see the [samples section](#samples).
```

### Correlation outside the process

Every event has a piece of data attached to it called [`ActivityID`]. This ID encodes the async hierarchy at the time the event was produced.

> If you look at a trace file in PerfView, you will see events like:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you look at a trace file in PerfView, you'll see events like:
```

```txt
System.Net.Http/Request/Start           ActivityID="/#14396/1/1/"
System.Net.Http/RequestHeaders/Start    ActivityID="/#14396/1/1/2/"
System.Net.Http/RequestHeaders/Stop     ActivityID="/#14396/1/1/2/"
System.Net.Http/ResponseHeaders/Start   ActivityID="/#14396/1/1/3/"
System.Net.Http/ResponseHeaders/Stop    ActivityID="/#14396/1/1/3/"
System.Net.Http/Request/Stop            ActivityID="/#14396/1/1/"
```

> You will know that these events belong to the same request because they share the `/#14396/1/1/` prefix.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You'll know that these events belong to the same request because they share the `/#14396/1/1/` prefix.
```

> When doing manual investigations, a useful trick is to look for the `System.Net.Http/Request/Start` event of a request you are interested in, then pasting its `ActivityID` in the `Text Filter` text box. If you now select all available providers, you will see the list of all events that were produced as part of that request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When doing manual investigations, a useful trick is to look for the `System.Net.Http/Request/Start` event of a request you're interested in, then paste its `ActivityID` in the `Text Filter` text box. If you now select all available providers, you'll see the list of all events that were produced as part of that request.
```

> PerfView will automatically collect the `ActivityID`, but if you use tools like `dotnet-trace`, you must explicitly enable the `System.Threading.Tasks.TplEventSource:0x80:4` provider (see `dotnet-trace` example above).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
PerfView automatically collects the `ActivityID`, but if you use tools like `dotnet-trace`, you must explicitly enable the `System.Threading.Tasks.TplEventSource:0x80:4` provider (see `dotnet-trace` example above).
```

> ## HttpClient Request vs Connection lifetime

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## HttpClient request vs. connection lifetime
```

Since .NET 6, an HTTP request is no longer tied to a specific connection.
Instead, the request will be serviced as soon as any connection is available.

> This means you may see the order of events such as:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This means you may see the following order of events:
```

1. Request start
1. Dns start
1. Request stop
1. Dns stop

This indicates that the request did trigger a DNS resolution, but was processed by a different connection before the DNS call completed. The same goes for socket connects or TLS handshakes - the originating request may complete before they do.

> You should think about such events separately - monitoring DNS resolutions or TLS handshakes on their own, without tying them to the timeline of a specific request.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You should think about such events separately. Monitor DNS resolutions or TLS handshakes on their own without tying them to the timeline of a specific request.
```

## Internal diagnostics

> Some components in .NET are instrumented with additional debug-level events that provide a lot of insight into exactly what is happening internally.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some components in .NET are instrumented with additional debug-level events that provide more insight into exactly what's happening internally.
```

These events come with high performance overhead and their shape is constantly changing. As the name suggests, they are not part of the public API and you should therefore not rely on their behavior or existence.

Regardless, these events can offer a lot of insights when all else fails.
The `System.Net` stack emits such events from `Private.InternalDiagnostics.System.Net.*` namespaces.

If you change the condition in the `EventListener` example above to `eventSource.Name.Contains("System.Net")`, you will see 100+ events from different layers in the stack.

> See [full example](https://gist.github.com/MihaZupan/4bed7333bcafde39e8b86beef2006475).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For more information, see the [full example](https://gist.github.com/MihaZupan/4bed7333bcafde39e8b86beef2006475).
```

Reviewer 2: Again, can we pull the code file into this repo?

## Need more telemetry?

> If you have suggestions for other useful information that could be exposed via events or metrics, please [let us know](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/new).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have suggestions for other useful information that could be exposed via events or metrics, create a [dotnet/runtime issue](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/new).
```

> If you are using the [`Yarp.Telemetry.Consumption`] library and have any suggestions, please [let us know](https://github.com/microsoft/reverse-proxy/issues/new).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you're using the [`Yarp.Telemetry.Consumption`] library and have any suggestions, create a [microsoft/reverse-proxy issue](https://github.com/microsoft/reverse-proxy/issues/new).
```

## Samples

> ### Measuring DNS resolutions for a given endpoint

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Measure DNS resolutions for a given endpoint
```

```c#
services.AddTelemetryConsumer(new DnsMonitor("httpbin.org"));

public sealed class DnsMonitor : INameResolutionTelemetryConsumer
{
    private static readonly AsyncLocal<DateTime?> _startTimestamp = new();
    private readonly string _hostname;

    public DnsMonitor(string hostname) => _hostname = hostname;

    public void OnResolutionStart(DateTime timestamp, string hostNameOrAddress)
    {
        if (hostNameOrAddress.Equals(_hostname, StringComparison.OrdinalIgnoreCase))
        {
            _startTimestamp.Value = timestamp;
        }
    }

    public void OnResolutionStop(DateTime timestamp)
    {
        if (_startTimestamp.Value is { } start)
        {
            Console.WriteLine($"DNS resolution for {_hostname} took {(timestamp - start).TotalMilliseconds} ms");
        }
    }
}
```

> ### Measuring time-to-headers when using HttpClient

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Measure time-to-headers when using HttpClient
```

    public void OnResponseHeadersStop(DateTime timestamp) =>
        RequestState.Current.HeadersReceived = timestamp;
}
```

### Time to process a request in ASP.NET Core running Kestrel

This is currently the most accurate way to measure the duration of a given request.

```c#
public sealed class KestrelTelemetryConsumer : IKestrelTelemetryConsumer
{
    private static readonly AsyncLocal<DateTime?> _startTimestamp = new();
    private readonly ILogger<KestrelTelemetryConsumer> _logger;

    public KestrelTelemetryConsumer(ILogger<KestrelTelemetryConsumer> logger) => _logger = logger;

    public void OnRequestStart(DateTime timestamp, string connectionId, string requestId, string httpVersion, string path, string method)
    {
        _startTimestamp.Value = timestamp;
    }

    public void OnRequestStop(DateTime timestamp, string connectionId, string requestId, string httpVersion, string path, string method)
    {
        if (_startTimestamp.Value is { } startTime)
        {
            var elapsed = timestamp - startTime;
            _logger.LogInformation("Request {requestId} to {path} took {elapsedMs} ms", requestId, path, elapsed.TotalMilliseconds);
        }
    }
}
```

> ### Measuring the latency of a .NET reverse proxy

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Measure the latency of a .NET reverse proxy
```

> Applicable if you have a reverse proxy that receives inbound requests via Kestrel and makes outbound requests via HttpClient (e.g. [YARP]).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This sample is applicable if you have a reverse proxy that receives inbound requests via Kestrel and makes outbound requests via HttpClient (e.g. [YARP]).
```

> Time from receiving request headers until we sent out the headers to the backend server.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This sample measures the time from receiving the request headers until they're sent out to the backend server.
```

    public InternalLatencyMonitor(ILogger<InternalLatencyMonitor> logger) => _logger = logger;

    public void OnRequestStart(DateTime timestamp, string connectionId, string requestId, string httpVersion, string path, string method)
    {
        _requestInfo.Value = new RequestInfo(timestamp, requestId, path);
    }

    public void OnRequestHeadersStop(DateTime timestamp)
    {
        if (_requestInfo.Value is { } requestInfo)
        {
            var elapsed = (timestamp - requestInfo.StartTimestamp).TotalMilliseconds;
            _logger.LogInformation("Internal latency for {requestId} to {path} was {duration} ms", requestInfo.RequestId, requestInfo.Path, elapsed);
        }
    }
}
```

[distributed tracing documentation]: ../../core/diagnostics/distributed-tracing.md
[EventCounters]: ../../core/diagnostics/event-counters.md
[well-known counters]: ../../core/diagnostics/available-counters.md
[dotnet-counter docs]: ../../core/diagnostics/dotnet-counters.md
[dotnet-trace docs]: ../../core/diagnostics/dotnet-trace.md
[dotnet-trace analysis docs]: ../../core/diagnostics/dotnet-trace.md#view-the-trace-captured-from-dotnet-trace
[PerfView]: https://github.com/microsoft/perfview

> [AppInsights EventCounters docs]: /azure/azure-monitor/app/eventcounters

Author: What should the relative link look like for this one?
I want to link to https://learn.microsoft.com/azure/azure-monitor/app/eventcounters

Reviewer 2: You have it correctly.

---
title: Networking Telemetry in .NET
description: Learn how to consume and correlate .NET telemetry events.
author: MihaZupan
ms.author: mizupan
ms.date: 10/18/2022
---

# Networking telemetry in .NET

The .NET networking stack is instrumented at various layers. .NET gives you the option to collect accurate timings throughout the lifetime of an HTTP request and event counters to monitor overall process statistics.

Networking information is split across several groups:

- `System.Net.Http` (`HttpClient` and `SocketsHttpHandler`)
- `System.Net.NameResolution` (`Dns`)
- `System.Net.Security` (`SslStream`)
- `System.Net.Sockets`
- `Microsoft.AspNetCore.Hosting`
- `Microsoft-AspNetCore-Server-Kestrel`

The telemetry has some performance overhead when enabled, so make sure to subscribe only to groups you're actually interested in.

> If you are looking for information on tracking HTTP operations across different services, see the [distributed tracing documentation].

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> [!TIP]
> If you're looking for information on tracking HTTP operations across different services, see the [distributed tracing documentation].
```

    HTTP 2.0 Requests Queue Duration (ms)              0
    HTTP 3.0 Requests Queue Duration (ms)              0
    Requests Failed                                    0
    Requests Failed Rate (Count / 1 sec)               0
    Requests Started                                 470
    Requests Started Rate (Count / 1 sec)             18
```

For all the available commands and parameters, see the [dotnet-counter docs].

#### Application Insights

Application Insights does not collect event counters by default.
For information on customizing the set of counters you're interested in, see the [AppInsights EventCounters docs].

For example:

```c#
services.ConfigureTelemetryModule<EventCounterCollectionModule>((module, options) =>
{
    module.Counters.Add(new EventCounterCollectionRequest("System.Net.Http", "current-requests"));
    module.Counters.Add(new EventCounterCollectionRequest("System.Net.Http", "requests-failed"));
    module.Counters.Add(new EventCounterCollectionRequest("System.Net.Http", "http11-connections-current-total"));
    module.Counters.Add(new EventCounterCollectionRequest("System.Net.Security", "all-tls-sessions-open"));
});
```

> See [this sample](snippets/misc/RuntimeEventCounters.cs) for subscribing to many runtime and ASP.NET event counters. Simply add an `EventCounterCollectionRequest` for every entry.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following code snippet demonstrates how to subscribe to many runtime and ASP.NET event counters. Simply add an `EventCounterCollectionRequest` for each entry.

:::code language="csharp" source="snippets/misc/RuntimeEventCounters.cs"":::
```

1. Request start
1. Dns start
1. Request stop
1. Dns stop

This indicates that the request did trigger a DNS resolution, but was processed by a different connection before the DNS call completed. The same goes for socket connects or TLS handshakes - the originating request may complete before they do.

You should think about such events separately. Monitor DNS resolutions or TLS handshakes on their own without tying them to the timeline of a specific request.

## Internal diagnostics

Some components in .NET are instrumented with additional debug-level events that provide more insight into exactly what's happening internally.
These events come with high performance overhead and their shape is constantly changing. As the name suggests, they are not part of the public API and you should therefore not rely on their behavior or existence.

Regardless, these events can offer a lot of insights when all else fails.
The `System.Net` stack emits such events from `Private.InternalDiagnostics.System.Net.*` namespaces.

If you change the condition in the `EventListener` example above to `eventSource.Name.Contains("System.Net")`, you will see 100+ events from different layers in the stack.

> For more information, see the [full example](snippets/internal-diag-telemetry/Program.cs).

Author: Could I point the link to the sample in this repo instead?
Something like
`Check out [some docs](https://github.com/dotnet/docs/blob/main/docs/fundamentals/networking/snippets/misc/Program.Ping.cs)`?

> For more information, see the [full example](snippets/internal-diag-telemetry/Program.cs).

Reviewer 2: I guess that is fine.

These events come with high performance overhead and their shape is constantly changing. As the name suggests, they are not part of the public API and you should therefore not rely on their behavior or existence.

Regardless, these events can offer a lot of insights when all else fails.
The `System.Net` stack emits such events from `Private.InternalDiagnostics.System.Net.*` namespaces.

If you change the condition in the `EventListener` example above to `eventSource.Name.Contains("System.Net")`, you will see 100+ events from different layers in the stack.
For more information, see the [full example](https://github.com/dotnet/docs/tree/main/docs/fundamentals/networking/snippets/internal-diag-telemetry/Program.cs).

## Need more telemetry?

If you have suggestions for other useful information that could be exposed via events or metrics, create a [dotnet/runtime issue](https://github.com/dotnet/runtime/issues/new).

If you're using the [`Yarp.Telemetry.Consumption`] library and have any suggestions, create a [microsoft/reverse-proxy issue](https://github.com/microsoft/reverse-proxy/issues/new).

## Samples

> 

Author: ```suggestion
```
